How to Win Friends and Influence People
Main Theme
Dealing with people is a major challenge for everyone, regardless of their occupation. By applying the principles in this book, you can increase your confidence, influence, and effectiveness. The goal is to learn how to get others to work with you instead of against you.

Part 1: Fundamental Techniques in Handling People

Don't criticize, condemn, or complain: Criticism is futile because it puts people on the defensive and dangerous because it fosters resentment. Instead of criticizing, try to understand why people act the way they do.

Give honest and sincere appreciation: People have a deep desire for a feeling of importance. Giving heartfelt appreciation can motivate them to help you accomplish anything you want. The difference between appreciation and flattery is that flattery is insincere and comes from the teeth out, while appreciation comes from the heart.

Arouse in the other person an eager want: You can get anything you want in life if you help enough other people get what they want. The key is to see things from the other person's perspective and talk in terms of what they want, not what you want.

Part 2: Six Ways to Make People Like You

Become genuinely interested in other people: You can make more friends by being genuinely interested in people than by trying to get them interested in you. This requires unselfish, thoughtful acts.

Smile: A smile conveys that you like someone and are glad to see them. It makes people feel good and makes you more effective at managing, teaching, and selling.

Remember and use the other person's name: A person's name is the sweetest and most important sound to them. Remembering and using it shows you care.

Be a good listener. Let others to talk often

: People crave an interested listener. If you are a good listener who encourages others to talk about themselves and their accomplishments, they will consider you a great conversationalist.

Talk in terms of the other person's interests: The way to a person's heart is to talk about the things most important to them.

Sincerely make the other person feel important: People will like you instantly if you make them feel important. Look for ways in which every person you meet is superior to you and acknowledge their uniqueness.

Part 3: How to Win People to Your Way of Thinking

You can't win an argument: The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it. Arguing makes people more convinced they are right. If you win, you lose the other person's goodwill.

If you're wrong, admit it quickly and definitively: Admitting your mistakes quickly can disarm others and make them more likely to fall over themselves to tell you it's not so bad. It can also give you a feeling of nobility.

Begin in a friendly way: A friendly, gentle approach will change people's minds more readily than bluster or anger.

Get the other person saying "yes" immediately: Start with common ground and get the person to say "yes" early on to build momentum.

Let the other person do all the talking: When someone comes to you with a complaint, let them talk themselves out.

Let the other person feel the idea is their own: No one likes to be told what to do or sold something. If you let people think an idea is their own, they will work harder to make it successful.

Try to see things from the other person's point of view: Cultivate this skill to know how to influence people. Ask yourself, "How would I react if I were in their shoes?".

Be sympathetic with the other person's ideas and desires: Everyone craves sympathy and wants to be understood.

Appeal to people's nobler motives: People like to think of themselves as fine and unselfish. Appeal to this motive.

Dramatize your ideas: Make your ideas vivid, interesting, and dramatic to capture attention.

Throw down a challenge: Appeal to people's desire to excel and feel important by challenging them to do something difficult.

Part 4: How to Change People Without Giving Offense or Arousing Resentment

Begin with praise and honest appreciation: People are more likely to accept criticism if you start with sincere praise.

Call attention to people's mistakes indirectly: Instead of using the word "but," which signals a problem, use "and". For example, "We're proud of you, and if you keep up this level of work, your grades will get to where they should be".

Talk about your own mistakes first: This eases tension and makes others more receptive to advice.

Ask questions instead of giving orders: This encourages cooperation and stimulates creativity.

Let the other person save face: When doing something unpleasant, be considerate of the other person's feelings.

Praise every improvement: People will blossom when you are hearty and unfailing in your praise.

Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to: People tend to live up to the reputation you give them.

Make the fault seem easy to correct: Use encouragement and show faith in the other person's ability.

Make the other person happy about doing what you suggest: People are more likely to do what you want if you make them feel good about it.