
Rich Dad Poor Dad - Book Summary
Rich Dad Poor Dad, published in 1997 by authors Robert Kiyosaki and Sharon Lechter, has sold over 32 million copies in more than 51 languages. The book, which was endorsed by celebrities such as Oprah Winfrey, stayed on the New York Times best-sellers list for six years. This summary highlights six rules that the authors believe can help you make your money work for you.

The author, Robert Kiyosaki, had two dads: his biological "Poor Dad" and his friend Mike's "Rich Dad". Kiyosaki's Poor Dad worked hard his whole life, was highly educated, but had a different philosophy on money than his Rich Dad. The Rich Dad, who didn't have as many degrees, made much more money.

Rule 1: The rich do not work for money
The key takeaway of this rule is that the poor work for money, while the rich have money work for them. Most people work for a monthly salary, but the fear of losing that job and source of income can trap them in a cycle of working hard just to pay bills. This "rat race" is fueled by fear and greed—the fear of not having enough money and the greed to buy more things.

A job is a short-term solution to a long-term problem. The only way to get out of the fear-greed trap is to choose your thoughts and be in control of your emotions rather than just reacting to them. The author and his friend Mike started a comic-book lending library that generated money even when they weren't physically present, which demonstrates the idea of having money work for you.

Rule 2: Financial literacy is necessary
Kiyosaki and his friend Mike both became financially successful thanks to the financial literacy lessons taught by Mike's dad. The main rule of financial literacy is to understand the difference between an asset and a liability. An asset puts money in your pocket, while a liability takes money out.

Many people think their house is an asset, but it's actually a liability, especially if it's bought with a 20- to 30-year mortgage. While a house may offer tax breaks, it also comes with additional expenses. The rich buy assets, the poor have expenses, and the middle class buys liabilities they think are assets. Instead of spending a salary hike on a bigger house, invest it in assets that generate income.

Rule 3: Mind your own business
This rule emphasizes the difference between your 

profession and your business. The founder of McDonald's, Ray Kroc, saw his profession as selling hamburger franchises but considered his business to be real estate, which was the primary success factor for his restaurants.

A professional is "minding" someone else's business and works for a salary. 